This episode is brought to you by curiosity stream,
a subscription streaming service that offers over 2000 documentaries and
nonfiction titles,
unlimited access starting at just 2 99 a month and 30 days for free.
If you sign up through the link below and use the code,
biographics more on them in a bit.
In today's video,
we are going to be discussing the military achievements of an outstanding cast
of characters, a finish officer who fought the red army on skis,
an American green beret who led dangerous covert missions from Iran to
Vietnam,
and the only orphan SS soldier to be buried at the Arlington military
cemetery in Virginia. What is truly unique though,
is that all these personas were played by just one singular person,
a natural born soldier who often ended up on the losing side, captured,
betrayed exiled, but never defeated.
He would rise from the ashes of war to continue his personal struggle against
his sworn enemies. This is the story of Lonnie Tory,
AKA Larry thorn, the Phoenix soldier,
Lori Toney was born on may the 25th, 1919 in UR,
a town on the Carol Imus, just north of Petrograd.
Lori completed his studies excelling in sports, skiing and boxing among others.
As he came of age,
Lori joins the national reserve of the finish army following the partitioning of
Polands by Germany and the Soviets in September of 1939,
the Soviet union hoped to push its borders further west by capturing the Carol
isthmus and securing Len grad, formerly Petrograd from a German attack.
The Soviets set also set their sites on several islands in the Gulf of Finlands
and on the hang Naval base. When Finland refused to grant such an annexation,
Joseph Stalin ordered the invasion thus a few months after low's 20th birthday
on November the 30th, 1939, the Soviet union invaded Finland.
It was the beginning of the Russell finish war. Also known as the wind war.
The finish arms forces well led by Marshall,
Carl Gustav Manheimer former artist officer severely. Our numbers are now guns.
The fins managed to put up one hell of a fight against the red army,
a huge opponents,
but one that was ill-equipped and poorly managed after Stalin had executed
dozens of his top generals during the great purge of 1937,
the Finnish army by contrast was a small,
flexible unit that had perfected the art of winter warfare and defensive tactics
exacting a huge to on the invaders. At the beginning of the war,
young L was a junior Sergeant in charge of food supplies.
Larry couldn't have felt at ease with his post.
He clearly understood how a constant supply of nourishment was vital for the
morale of his fellow troops,
but he thought he was capable of much more than just supply line managements.
One night as the temperature plummeted to minus 42 Celsius,
Larry silently slipped out of the camp completely unseen and unheard by his
own sentinels Sergeant to walked to a Soviet outpost captured a Russian soldier
ends marched him back to the finish camp.
The effects on his soldiers morale was galvanizing lower superiors realized that
this 20 year old NCO had a talent for light I infantry missions and assigned him
his first special task low was putting commands of an anti tank patrol.
Basically it was people fighting on foot or on skis whose mission was to attack
Soviet tanks and destroy them, which sounds really not easy at all,
but against any logical be Larry and disqua did manage to blow out quite a few
tanks and still live to tell the story.
Larry and ti fins distinguished themselves,
particularly at the siege of east laiti pocket.
This was in late February of 1940 here,
the fins in circled and wiped out a strong red army contingent capturing 71
tanks, 206 trial and 12 armored cars.
Larry was put on a special officers course becoming a second left tenant in
March as a first assignment,
he was put in charge of a company of ethnic Swed soldiers.
They did not speak Finn. Pete did not speak Swedish,
but with the use of clear hand gestures and the common language of let's blow up
the invaders, the young officer and his troops got along.
Bely on a broader stage though, the war was not going well for Finland.
Despite having bloodied the nose of the Soviet bear.
The disadvantage in terms of manpower,
artillery and tanks was starting to take its inevitable toll already by
February.
The Soviets had breached the Fin's main defensive line on the Southern end of
the fronts, the Manheim line, once they broke through,
they were able to occupy Carlia and threatened LA's hometown VII
from the third through the 11th of March,
1940 heavy fighting took place around the Caran capital while a finished
delegation in Moscow sought to establish terms for a cease fire.
The Moscow peace treaty was eventually signed at 2:00 AM on March the 13th.
Finlands had to see 10% of its territory and 12% of it its population to the
Soviet union, including Carol and V peri.
It had been a per victory for the red army,
which had suffered 167,000 Kaia and Mia versus
26,000 on the finish side. But it had been of victory. Nonetheless,
one that a lower 20 would never forget and never forgive
At the end of the conflict.
Larry was awarded the medals of independence first and second class,
which became the first in a long series of decorations,
but such accolades could not compensate for the humiliation of losing one 10th
of his country to the invaders, including his home town.
Larry was described both by friends and army superiors as quiet,
pleasant and courteous.
He was a well liked young man with whom it was easy to get along,
but this mostly mild maned man had found a powerful vocation in fighting
against a stronger opponent,
either in direct or indirect service to Finlands.
That is why in the late spring of 1941, when Finland was a neutral country,
deep in the background of world war II,
Lowry Toney decided to rise from his country's defeat and head back to battle
this need for retribution drew of him to travel to Germany and secret and join a
newly constituted, wha SS battalion, the free VI Nord dot.
It was not uncommon for citizens of neutral, occupied,
or even allied countries to volunteer for SS formations,
either out of Simpy either the Nazi sea cause hatred of Bolshevism or both
as part of the thrive VI Nord do Tony received intensive training,
which honed his natural skillset,
performing special operations deep inside enemy territory on June the 22nd,
1941 axis forces invaded the Soviet union.
This was the start of operation. Barbara RO Finland's joins the invasion,
not as a formal member of the axis, but as a coll in country,
the Finn objective was simply to recapture the territories that had lost in the
treaty of Moscow,
rather than expanding that living space Eastwood into a new land.
This conflict became known as the continuation war and was again masterminded
by field Marshall Manheim.
The commander asked for Berlin to return the mini finish volunteers who joins
the Vahan SS to replenish the army ranks with Lori Toney chief among them at
the start of 1942.
Second left tenant Toney was put in charge of a light infantry patrol deployed
in Carle. It was payback time.
His unit was part of the forces that drove the Soviets away from the Imus
captured the main Garrison of Petro Avast. From there.
Tony continued to push Northwood to reach the white sea Baltic canal then called
the Starling canal. Laurie's advance was halted on March the 23rd,
1942 while on a ski reconnaissance mission.
Larry stepped over a landmine and was severely wounded or recovering in the
hospital.
Tony received a promotion who left tenants and in order to stay put for several
weeks, which she absolutely ignored with fragments of shrapnel,
still embedded in his body.
Tony escaped from the military hospital to rejoin his old unit through 1943
Lowry.
Ledon trained several units in charge of connaissance and sabotage missions,
deep behind enemy lines and exceptionally fit. Man.
He expected his recruits to match his levels of strength, stamina, resilience,
and skill in close quarters combat, especially with the Paco,
the traditional finish knife,
his company became known as the asaso to or the,
to detachment its symbol was a capital T set against the backdrop of yellow
lightning.
Some of twenty's best documented exploits took place in the summer of 1944.
When the red army launched counter actor retake the Carol Imus on June the
ninth, a couple of days after D-Day a couple of thousand miles away,
his division was at risk of once again, being engulfed by the Soviets,
lefthand and Donny,
and his unit managed to break a Soviet and supplement maneuver,
inflicting heavy casualties on the enemy. Two weeks later,
low personally performed an incursion behind enemy lines during which he
acquired vital intelligence on the Soviet strategy intelligence,
which helped his commanders hold off the counter attack in Carlia on the fifth
and 6th of July,
the 20 detachment was instructed to hold the crucial elementary crossroads or
costs. They reduced to less than a hundred men after the beginning of the Soviet
offensive. And they were about to face two regiments of the red army,
a total of 4,000 enemy soldiers against all military logic.
Larry split his men into even smaller units. Sure. They may have been weaker,
but they were also highly mobile by shuttling back and forth between them.
Larry was able to direct a Syria of counter attacks against the incoming
Soviets,
which were convinced they were facing a much larger force Tony's company,
inflicted hundreds of losses on the red army,
halting their advance and allowing for the bulk of the finished forces to
retreat and regroup.
It was a tactical masterpiece that achieved an important strategic result,
but Larry did not have time to celebrate as once again,
he onto a Soviet mine mark on voes learns that he had been made a nice of
the cross of Manheim.
The highest military decoration in the finish armed forces.
It is estimated that a total of 600,000 fins served in the continuation war
Buton 191 of them received such high military honor. The following month,
he was promoted to captain at the same time,
the Soviets had bestowed on Larry and even higher accolade propaganda radio
broadcasts had issued a bounty on his head, dead or alive. The Soviets swept,
willing to pay 3 million finish marks,
which corresponds to more than half a million us dollars in today's money.
It's a small fortune, especially during wartime yet.
No one dead could like the reward.
Larry and as men continued to fight in Carlia,
but their commander inchi Marshall,
and is now president Manheim was coming to terms with a harsh reality.
The fights could not go on forever against the red steam roller,
especially now that Germany and its allies were losing grounds on August the
25th, 1944. The finished governments initiated secret talks with Mosco,
which led to the signing of an Armas on September the 19th.
The conditions while ensuring the survival of the nation were extremely harsh.
Finland had a seed back 10% of its territory, including Carol and VII.
PSIN also had to pay war reparations to Moscow equivalents to almost four,
a half billion us dollars in today's money. And if that wasn't enough,
man Heim was forced to demobilize most of his army and to expel any remaining
ver marked units from finished territory.
This became known as the Lapland war one in which low did not take part
as he had been demobilized. Once again, low Toney,
wasn't prepared to yield Emitt the wreckage of another unfair defeat,
like the mythical Phoenix rising from its own ashes.
He was eager to continue the fight against the Soviets whose peace treaty.
He just did not trust alongside other demobilized troops Lowry fled to Hamburg
in a UBO to resume special operations training in a often SS facility.
And Linberg along the BTIC coast.
He Lari perfected his approach to asymmetric warfare,
including sabotage techniques, explosives handling,
and deep reconnaissance tactics. Unfortunately for Tony,
the program was halted after a few weeks of training because the red army was
making its way towards Berlin.
The mark was in desperate need of about ready troops.
And so captain Dony was drafted.
He was tasked with leading a Naval infantry company,
deployed east of Berlin facing once more,
the invader of his homelands toy for valiantly against the incoming enemies.
But once again,
his tactical victories could not overcome the Soviet's overwhelming numerical
superiority facing inevitable capture a by the Soviets,
which would've meant almost certain death.
Tony instead sought to turn himself in as a prisoner to the British unit,
which had landed nearby airfield.
His bet paid off and the British did not kill him on site.
He was sent instead to a P O w camp in Belgium and then transferred to lube in
Germany life as a British prisoner was surely better than living as an inmate
in a Guag.
But rumors started spreading that the Western allies were transferring some of
their POWs to the Soviets.
Tony was not going to risk that he partnered with fellow fin,
sooo Corella and escaped from the camp in July of 1945.
The circumstances of how they did it are not clear.
What is documented is that they posed as former prisoners of the ver mark to hit
a ride from a British army captain.
Eventually they reached Copenhagen and secured travel visas from the finished
consulate Lowry toy had emerged from the ruins of Thery and was finally heading
home. But what he received was not a heroes welcome.
And just before we continue with today's video,
I'd like to take a quick moment to mention today's sponsor,
who I cure really enjoy that sponsor is curiosity stream and
curiosity stream is a subscription streaming service that offers over 2000
documentaries and nonfiction titles from some of the world's best filmmakers,
including exclusive originals. And if you're enjoying this video,
then why not check out curiosity stream for free.
They've got a lot of stuff about wars in the 20th entry.
One that is particularly good is about kind of what was left behind after the
Vietnam war. It's called Vietnam war hidden traces.
And if you're enjoying this video, you will like that one.
It looks at sort of all the secret tunnels and bunkers and even more dangerous
things like unexploded bombs that were left behind.
It's really fascinating stuff. Curiosity stream is available on many platforms.
There's a web app, Roku, Android,
Xbox one on your smart TV iOS it's available on.
If you can think of a device it's probably on there and it's also available
worldwide. So no geo restrictions are being like, ah,
you can't see that documentary because you don't live in that country.
Doesn't work like that available worldwide,
get unlimited access starting at just 2 99 in a month. And for you guys,
the first 30 days are completely free. If you sign up at curiosity,
stream.com/biographics and use the promo code biographics during the signup
process, it's a great way to support this show keeps us making videos.
And speaking of that, let's get back to it.
When Larry returns to Finland in August, 1945,
he was almost immediately prosecuted for treason by the Valpo,
the finished state police, technically they were not wrong.
Tony had escaped a Hamburg and joined of the VE mark during the Lapland war.
In other words, he has essentially defected to the enemy.
The situation was complicated by Finland's delicate position between the end of
world war II and the start of the cold war while the red army could have invaded
yet again, as it had done with almost all of Eastern Europe,
Stalin actually preferred a less aggressive approach.
He demanded instead Phil inland remain a neutral country,
but under a strong Soviet influence, it was a Shrew strategic move.
As it would prevent NATO from deploying future troops along the Soviet finished
border.
One of the longest sanctions of the Soviet union's borders Moscow's influence
extended to the appointments of ministers and officials aligned to the communist
party. And one of them was the chief of the Valpo. Anyway, in August of 1945,
Tony had been arrested for treason and was placed on a train headed to a high
security prison. Lonnie did not wait for the term to begin.
He simply jumped off the train during a stop for the next few months,
Larry reunited with his beloved parents and his sister Caja.
There had been forcibly relocated from Vapo to hell sinky year.
He worked at an electrical supply firm and generally lived in the open.
He enjoyed the simple pleasures of life as a free and innocent man. However,
after a coworker reported him to the Valpo,
the former officer was apprehended once more a trial in October of 1946,
sentenced him to six years in prison for high treason. Once again,
the only way out of that sticky situation was to, well just leave.
Tony certainly was no stranger to evasions. So in the spring of 1947,
he simply walked out of jail. Thanks to a false ID card smuggled in by a friend,
his life as a fugitive didn't last long though, as the Valpo had an as OMP,
their sleeve,
the police spread the false rumor that he was wanted for theft a blemish on his
upright reput that Tony could not tolerate, willing to clear his record.
He handed himself over voluntarily and returned to behind bars at tur state
prison,
but it wasn't long before the restless captain was ready to attempt another
escape while generally a quiet man.
Larry could make a quite gen and cultured companion.
He made friends with theist and service at the prison church while serving as
his assistant,
he identified a poorly secured window in the chapel from which he believed he
could escape with a classic tactic,
a rope made of bedsheets tied to an iron hook, but on the nights of the escape,
a guard discovered him and took him with his rifle ready to end this indomitable
soldier's career.
Luckily the gun malfunctions and toy was apprehended without serious.
And by the end of the decade,
the Soviet script on the finished government had loosened enough for the
presidents to issue a pardon for 20. Unfortunately the pardon involved,
his being stripped of his rank.
His name was removed from official war records to the date was October the
sixth, 1950.
Larry felt betrayed and he wasn't sure that there was anything else he could
offer his own country. So in 1949,
he decided to immigrate crossing the border into Sweden here.
He started a new life as a lumberjack. He started dating a girl from Stockholm,
Maya cops, the first and only real love of his life.
The two got engaged on near the first 1950 and had even set a date for their
wedding.
The two had agreed that Larry would wear his old captain's uniform for the
wedding photo shoot. So the girl traveled to Finland to collect it, but fate,
through a spanner in the works,
Larry had previously applied for a visa to travel to Venezuela under the alias
of Emma Meki.
His intention was to join community of Finnish Aban in the Americas and start a
new life. After months of waiting, the visa had finally arrived. Unfortunately,
this offered only a very limited time window for LA to leave Sweden and so toy.
Well, he was torn.
He was torn between his new love and the opportunity to start a new life away
from Europe. In the end, he opted to leave before Maya could return.
Larry got in touch and probably a story would be back,
but their connection waned over the years,
eventually Maya moved Toles Palm to marry a Spanish man down in south America,
lower landed in Caracas in March of 1950,
taking on odd jobs around the local finish community to make ends meet among
these jobs low would work as a babysitter for his compatriots.
And that is a pretty interesting change of career w SS captain
special forces operator looking after young children. How about that?
Beyond babysitting a job more suited to Larry was as a sailor Ron merchant ship
sailing to the us. The Finn had since long set of sight on moving to the us,
but the status of his visa did not allow him to step off the boat onto dry
lands. But a man like Tony,
not less a little paperwork get in his way by now an escape artist on par with a
great Houdini.
Larry simply jumped overboards off the coast of Louisiana and swam safely as to
new Orleans from there. Larry made his way to New York where settled in Harlem,
resuming his routine of odd jobs. By 1951,
Larry had been apprehended by the FBI. He was an illegal immigrants after rule,
and it was only a matter of time before he would be kicked outta the country.
Luckily in New York, Tony had become friends with one parvo Fleming.
This gentleman was the president of an association of finished veterans and
soldiers in the us.
And he had immediately recognized the great potential that Larry could offer to
the us armed forces. Fleming had brought Larry's case to the,
of retired general William wild bill Donovan key figure within the OSS and
later the CIA.
Now an attorney Donovan agreed to represent Toney and was able to secure him a
permit to remain in the United States. Not only that,
but he interceded for him to be enrolled in the us army.
This is when Laurie Toney reemerged as Larry Allen thorn legend
of the green Berets
In January, 1954, former captain 20 started basic training at Fort,
New Jersey as private thorn. While there,
it must have been a strange experience.
He was 34 years old while the average age of soldiers was 19.
He had the inclination to lead,
but also had to retrain as a low ranking soldier.
His English was also not really up to scratch,
but he did manage to communicate at least in part with a blend of hand gestures
and shouted profound. After completing basic training,
he attended two specialization courses. First,
there was the mountain and a cold weather survival course,
which must have felt like any other Tuesday to him.
There was also the para course for Bening, Georgia, which,
and in may halo certificate in 1957,
Larry was serving in BAV as a member of the 11th airborne division.
He had performed well in the us military climbing up to the rank of first left
tenant. However, following several months of relative quiet,
he got into serious trouble in December, 1958,
th thorn was involved in a pub rule with some locals fist fight,
which ended in his throwing several Bavarian patrons through a plate glass
window. Larry was arrested and caught martialed.
He sir risked his own dismissal from the army. That luck was on his side.
Investigators found that some of the Germans involved in the rule had a criminal
record and at least two of them were bonded by the police at Thorn's court
martial. In October, 1959, he was found not guilty.
Th thorn could have returned to his duties,
but he preferred to accept a transfer instead to the 10th group of the special
forces, the green Berets based in bar dolls in Germany.
It was with this team that in July of 1962 Lowry took part in one of his best
known missions.
His unit was tasked with retrieving the wreckage of an auto reconnaissance
plane.
The aircraft had crashed of the Zagros mountains in Iran after a secret missions
to gather Intel on Larry thorns old nemesis, the Soviet union,
two previous crews of German mountain near troops that failed to locate the OT,
which contained information too sensitive to be left unattended on a mountaintop
under the leadership of captain Chandler,
Larry and a dozen green Berets climbed the unforgiving terrain of the Zagros
range and succeeded in reaching the wreckage.
They retrieved the classified Intel as well as the bodies of the airmen who had
died in the crash along the way.
Larry and his friends even found time to provide medical aid to isolated
communities on the mountains. In early 1963,
Lieutenant thorn was assigned a mission in south Vietnam as a military advisor.
His job was to work with the south Vietnamese special forces,
which he led in several airborne missions on one such assignment thorn,
his Sergeant and 10 south of Vietnamese militia were ambushed by 120
via con Larry's dirty dozen soundly defeated the gorillas.
And he was awarded a bronze star after this first tour in Vietnam that now
captain thorn returned to Fort Benning for more advanced training after which he
was ordered to do a second tour in Vietnam during the spring and summer of 1965,
thorn was working at the special forces group headquarters at Nareg as an
intelligence officer, it was mainly a quieted job,
but surprisingly he liked it and was soon recognized as the leader of Narans
intelligence operations in late June,
the base came under a attack from the via con,
but the gorillas did not achieve the intended pal.
This was thanks to Thorn's intelligence work,
which had enabled the prompt response of defense elements stated by his
commanding officer in an after action report.
It was also thanks to this success that Larry was assigned to lead operations
shining brass in September.
This was a secret infiltration of reconnaissance element into Lao,
formerly neutral country. On October the 18th, 1965, Larry thorn boarded,
a helicopter with south Vietnamese operatives,
a photo taken that day depicted him as he gets to the chopper.
This was the last photo ever taken of captain Lori Toney reborn in
the west as captain Larry thorn.
The objective of the mission were to pinpoint the location of communist troop
encampments. From that perspective, Larry had scored another success.
His team did locate the enemy base and the us dropped 95 tons of bombs on it.
Two weeks later. However, during the flight itself,
Michigan control lost all contact with Thorn's helicopter and he and his
comrades were declared missing in action. Exactly. One later on October,
the 19th, 1966, they were all declared killed in action,
although neither their bodies nor the helicopter were ever located during the
remaining years of the Vietnam conflict.
So did he actually die in a helicopter crash?
Had he been captured by the via or by the north Vietnamese army?
Had he resurfaced again in another country with ready to fight another war?
Well, it took more than 30 years to solve the mystery. In 1999,
thorns remains were found 25 miles south of Ang by a joint finished us task
force. He was repatriated to America, formally identified in 2003.
His remains were buried on June the 26th, 2003 at Arlington national cemetery,
section 60 tombstone, 8,136.
He was buried alongside the remaining south Vietnam air force casualties from
his final mission
In his 47 years of life.
Larry Toney had fought in three different wars on behalf of three completely D
countries. All of which bestowed upon him, praise for his valor.
He could proudly wear 17 military decorations, including the Manheim cross,
the iron cross, a distinguished flying cross and a bronze star to this day.
Us special forces have an award named after him.
A former Comrad from the Vietnam war.
Robin Moore took inspiration from Toney for the character of spend corny in his
book. The green Berets,
this was later turned into a movie where the corny character would be
interpreted by the duke himself, John Wayne. And in 2014,
Larry was celebrated by metal band Sabo on in their song,
soldier of three armies.
If you want to know more about the crazy life of this character,
I can recommend the books born a soldier by Mike cleverly and soldier under
three flags by Henry A. Gill.
Of course not everybody agrees with his hero status, Finn authors,
Juha Poonan and ULA silver OAN in their book.
Unknown Lori 20 suggests that at the end of world war II,
the fin had joined a Nazi resistance movements with the purpose of carrying out,
say national socialist coup in Finlands. The book is available only in finish,
but we'll leave a link to the ebook in the description in case you speak that
language controversy aside, I really do hope you enjoy today's video.
Please do like and subscribe if you did,
and as always thank you for watching.